Create transitioning-contractor-code-to-innersource-model (#377)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: patterns/1-initial/transitioning-contractor-code-to-innersource-model.md

## Title

Transitioning Contractor Code to InnerSource Model

## Patlet

Contract developers are often not motivated to engage in InnerSource activities, which may be beyond the scope of their contract. This patlet describes how you can focus on transitioning the contractor project after the fact to an InnerSource project.

## Problem

> Contractor developers are often not motivated (through forces described below) to not engage in InnerSource activities. Once delivered, and even if the code is made visible, their projects are often less likely to be part of successful InnerSourced engagements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contractor developers are often not motivated (through forces described below) to engage in InnerSource activities. Once delivered, and even if the code is made visible, their projects are often less likely to be part of successful InnerSourced engagements.
```

Fixing double negation.

Also what do you mean by "InnerSourced engagements"?

## Context

This problem exists where an organization either:

- out-sources the development of a well defined project or

> - engagages external firms for staff augmentation and has mixed teams of permanent employees with a large percentage of contract staff. This issue may occur less often in a mixed team where InnerSource principles and ways of working are already established within the organization, but the forces described below are still often at play.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- engages external firms for staff augmentation and has mixed teams of permanent employees with a large percentage of contract staff. This issue may occur less often in a mixed team where InnerSource principles and ways of working are already established within the organization, but the forces described below are still often at play.
```

## Forces

Contractor Motivation and Constraints:

- Often contracts with third-party developers are very focused on delivering an end result in the fastest possible fashion. As a result, all InnerSource activities (e.g. responding to third-party PRs) are considered to be distractions or something that will “slow down” ultimate delivery.
- There is also often a concern that accepting code from other parts of the business might introduce security risks, scope creep or other issues that would subsequently have to be resolved by the contract team.

> - Above and beyond the idea that InnerSource may slow down the project, there is often an additional concern that accepting PRs from other parts of the company may “muddy the waters” when it comes to assessing what parts of the project were completed/delivered by the contracted developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Above and beyond the idea that InnerSource may slow down the project, there is often an additional concern that accepting PRs from other parts of the company may “muddy the waters” when it comes to assessing what parts of the project were completed/delivered by the contracted developers.
- Contractors may have concerns about loss of control over the projects technical details if other teams are contributing significantly.
Even when motivations align (a project can be completed faster or with higher quality by engaging in InnerSource) contractors might still be unclear if they can because it is not explicitly listed as allowed in the contract terms.
```

All of the above can mean that even if an individual contract developer wants to engage in InnerSource, there are system-level constraints pushing them not to.

It should be noted that the above scenario is indirectly impacted by:

- The norms around defining Statements of Work for third party contractors
- Pressures to reduce contractor costs during procurement
- Ability to tie contributions to payment at a granular level.

> It could also be noted that the Contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the oft-reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units. (Not sure if this is relevant, but it does seem to be an extreme case of what is reported as common objections even in internal teams).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It could also be noted that the contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the oft-reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units. (Not sure if this is relevant, but it does seem to be an extreme case of what is reported as common objections even in internal teams).
```

## Solutions

At the outset of the project, clearly define:

- That the code will be made visible by default.

> - How the project will be transitioned to an InnerSource project. (Zack can add more explicit details here)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- That the architecture of the code should be modular and ready for component reuse.
- How the project will be transitioned to an InnerSource project. This could be similar to a transition of ownership plan for an open source project which should include: 
  - Identification of new a maintainer team
  - An announcement to stakeholders regarding the transition
  - Written documentation describing functionality, architecture, and common processes like releasing, patching, deploying, testing, etc.
  - A prescribed number of hours on the contract set aside for the contractor to meet with the identified long term maintainer (normally from the company who hired the contractor) for an overview of responsibilities and Q & A.
  - (untested) A 30 day warranty pattern could be applied and so the contractor would provide 30 days of direct transition support to the new maintainers

```

Reviewer: @zkoppert for the "transition of ownership plan for an open source project", is there a resource that we could link to that explains how this is done in open source?

Reviewer: Further I am wondering how typical contracts between company and contractor describe the expected handover behavior (even bevor this pattern is in place)?

As any source code needs to be maintained, the project that a contractor build would need a maintainer afterwards, even if not working in an InnerSource model. How would that typically work?

Reviewer 2: I've seen contract language that specifies transition deliverables that include: 
- Written documentation describing functionality, architecture, and common processes like releasing, patching, deploying, etc.
- A prescribed number of hours on the contract set aside for the contractor to meet with the identified long term maintainer (normally from the company who hired the contractor) for an overview of responsibilities and Q & A.
I haven't seen but it could be tried:
- Apply the 30 day warranty pattern and so the contractor provides 30 days of direct transition support to the new maintainer

Reviewer 2: I don't have any specific resources but I am checking with some other folks to see if they know of any related to transition of ownership.

Reviewer 2: Here is a resource on transitioning leadership in an OSS project that seems relevant: https://contribute.cncf.io/maintainers/governance/leadership-selection/#transition-from-existing-leadership-to-new-governance

Reviewer: > * Written documentation describing functionality, architecture, and common processes like releasing, patching, deploying, etc.
> * A prescribed number of hours on the contract set aside for the contractor to meet with the identified long term maintainer (normally from the company who hired the contractor) for an overview of responsibilities and Q & A.
>   I haven't seen but it could be tried:
> * Apply the 30 day warranty pattern and so the contractor provides 30 days of direct transition support to the new maintainer

Would be great work these bullets directly into the Solution.

Reviewer 2: I worked those into my suggestion above.

It is noted that this practice can work very well where there is a high trust relationship between the contracting team and the contractors. Perhaps they have worked closely together before, or have a pre-existing relationship. Further patterns that explore how to build trust between teams might enhance this pattern.

## Resulting Context

This particular pattern does not attempt to change the initial behavior of the contract development team (in terms of their potential lack of engagement with the InnerSource process). However, the end result is that the project does become part of the InnerSourced projects for the company after the fact.

> ## Known Instances (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Known Instances
```

GitHub has seen this approach work with their US government agency customers.

## Status (optional until merging)

> TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Status

Initial
```

I suggest to publish this pattern as **Initial** first, even if we have a Known Instance from GitHub already. That allows us to get further feedback before leveling the pattern up to Structured and publish it in the book eventually.

> GitHub has seen this approach work with their government customers. Zack Koppert can add details as appropriate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GitHub has seen this approach work with their US government agency customers.
```

> ## Author(s) (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Author(s)
```

> Clare Dillon (v.0 assuming others will add themselves in this section as we flesh it out).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clare Dillon (v.0 assuming others will add themselves in this section as we flesh it out).
Zack Koppert
```

> ## Acknowledgements (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements
```

## Solutions

At the outset of the project, clearly define:

- That the code will be made visible by default.
- How the project will be transitioned to an InnerSource project. (Zack can add more explicit details here)

It is noted that this practice can work very well where there is a high trust relationship between the contracting team and the contractors. Perhaps they have worked closely together before, or have a pre-existing relationship. Further patterns that explore how to build trust between teams might enhance this pattern.

## Resulting Context

This particular pattern does not attempt to change the initial behavior of the contract development team (in terms of their potential lack of engagement with the InnerSource process). However, the end result is that the project does become part of the InnerSourced projects for the company after the fact.

## Known Instances

GitHub has seen this approach work with their US government agency customers.

## Status (optional until merging)

TBD

## Author(s)

> Clare Dillon (v.0 assuming others will add themselves in this section as we flesh it out).
> Zack Koppert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clare Dillon (v.0 assuming others will add themselves in this section as we flesh it out).
- Zack Koppert
```

## Acknowledgements

Particular thanks to Zack Koppert for sharing his experiences in this area and to Gil Yehuda for raising the issue in the InnerSource Slack channel.

This pattern was extracted from a conversation on the topic held with the following folks:

- Brittany Istenes
- Clare Dillon
- Cristina Coffey
- Derek Murawsky
- Gil Yehuda
- Zack Koppert

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Title

Transitioning Contractor Code to InnerSource Model

## Patlet

> Contract developers are often not motivated to engage in InnerSource activities, which may be beyond the scope of their contract. This patlet describes how you can focus on transitioning the contractor project after the fact to an InnerSource project.

Reviewer: The idea of the Patlet is that the 1st sentence describes the problem, while the 2nd sentence describes the solution. This allows readers to quickly scan for problems they have and solutions they need.

Therefore I would suggest to rewrite the 2nd sentence as a summary of the solution outlined in this pattern.

## Problem

Contractor developers are often not motivated (through forces described below) to not engage in InnerSource activities. Once delivered, and even if the code is made visible, their projects are often less likely to be part of successful InnerSourced engagements.

## Context

This problem exists where an organization either:

- out-sources the development of a well defined project or
- engagages external firms for staff augmentation and has mixed teams of permanent employees with a large percentage of contract staff. This issue may occur less often in a mixed team where InnerSource principles and ways of working are already established within the organization, but the forces described below are still often at play.

## Forces

Contractor Motivation and Constraints:

> - Often contracts with third-party developers are very focused on delivering an end result in the fastest possible fashion. As a result, all InnerSource activities (e.g. responding to third-party PRs) are considered to be distractions or something that will “slow down” ultimate delivery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Contracts with third-party developers tend to be focused on delivering an end result in the fastest possible fashion. As a result, all InnerSource activities (e.g. responding to third-party PRs) are considered to be distractions or something that will “slow down” delivery.
```

shortening suggestion (leaving away some of the "qualifying" language)

> - There is also often a concern that accepting code from other parts of the business might introduce security risks, scope creep or other issues that would subsequently have to be resolved by the contract team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Concern that accepting code from other parts of the business might introduce security risks, scope creep or other issues that would subsequently have to be resolved by the contract team.
```

shortening suggestion

> - Above and beyond the idea that InnerSource may slow down the project, there is often an additional concern that accepting PRs from other parts of the company may “muddy the waters” when it comes to assessing what parts of the project were completed/delivered by the contracted developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Concern that accepting PRs from other parts of the company may “muddy the waters” when it comes to assessing what parts of the project were completed/delivered by the contracted developers.
```

shortening suggestion

- Contractors may have concerns about loss of control over the projects technical details if other teams are contributing significantly.

> Even when motivations align (a project can be completed faster or with higher quality by engaging in InnerSource) contractors might still be unclear if they can because it is not explicitly listed as allowed in the contract terms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Even when motivations align (a project can be completed faster or with higher quality by engaging in InnerSource) contractors might still be unclear if they can because it is not explicitly listed as allowed in the contract terms.
```

Formatting as part of the list (assuming that this sentence should be it's own bullet?)

All of the above can mean that even if an individual contract developer wants to engage in InnerSource, there are system-level constraints pushing them not to.

It should be noted that the above scenario is indirectly impacted by:

- The norms around defining Statements of Work for third party contractors
- Pressures to reduce contractor costs during procurement
- Ability to tie contributions to payment at a granular level.

> It could also be noted that the contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the oft-reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units. (Not sure if this is relevant, but it does seem to be an extreme case of what is reported as common objections even in internal teams).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It could also be noted that the contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the oft-reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units. 
_(Not sure if this is relevant, but it does seem to be an extreme case of what is reported as common objections even in internal teams)._
```

Was the 2nd sentence meant as an internal comment for the other Editors? If yes, we should remove it before publishing. Left it in here in italics for now.

Also what does "oft-reported" mean? "often-reported"?

Author: Removed - as was comment for other editors. Switched oft-reported to often reported for clarity.

## Solutions

At the outset of the project, clearly define:

> - That the code will be made visible by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- That the code will be made visible by default to all developers within the organization.
```

- How the project will be transitioned to an InnerSource project. (Zack can add more explicit details here)

It is noted that this practice can work very well where there is a high trust relationship between the contracting team and the contractors. Perhaps they have worked closely together before, or have a pre-existing relationship. Further patterns that explore how to build trust between teams might enhance this pattern.

## Resulting Context

This particular pattern does not attempt to change the initial behavior of the contract development team (in terms of their potential lack of engagement with the InnerSource process). However, the end result is that the project does become part of the InnerSourced projects for the company after the fact.

## Known Instances

> GitHub has seen this approach work with their US government agency customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **GitHub** has seen this approach work with their US government agency customers.
```

Turning this into a list to motivate the addition of further instances.

## Title

Transitioning Contractor Code to InnerSource Model

## Patlet

> Contract developers are often not motivated to engage in InnerSource activities, which may be beyond the scope of their contract. This patlet describes how you can focus on transitioning the contractor project after the fact to an InnerSource project by setting expectations for specific InnerSource-related deliverables as part of the overall project delivery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contract developers are often not motivated to engage in InnerSource activities, which may be beyond the scope of their contract. This pattern describes how you can focus on transitioning the contractor project after the fact to an InnerSource project by setting expectations for specific InnerSource-related deliverables as part of the overall project delivery.
```

- Concern that accepting code from other parts of the business might introduce security risks, scope creep or other issues that would subsequently have to be resolved by the contract team.
- Concern that accepting PRs from other parts of the company may “muddy the waters” when it comes to assessing what parts of the project were completed/delivered by the contracted developers.
- Contractors may have concerns about loss of control over the projects technical details if other teams are contributing significantly.
- Even when motivations align (a project can be completed faster or with higher quality by engaging in InnerSource) contractors might still be unclear if they can because it is not explicitly listed as allowed in the contract terms.

All of the above can mean that even if an individual contract developer wants to engage in InnerSource, there are system-level constraints pushing them not to.

It should be noted that the above scenario is indirectly impacted by:

- The norms around defining Statements of Work for third party contractors
- Pressures to reduce contractor costs during procurement
- Ability to tie contributions to payment at a granular level.

> It could also be noted that the contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the often reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It could also be noted that the contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the often reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units.
```

  - A prescribed number of hours on the contract set aside for the contractor to meet with the identified long term maintainer (normally from the company who hired the contractor) for an overview of responsibilities and Q & A.
  - (untested) A 30 day warranty pattern could be applied and so the contractor would provide 30 days of direct transition support to the new maintainers

It is noted that this practice can work very well where there is a high trust relationship between the contracting team and the contractors. Perhaps they have worked closely together before, or have a pre-existing relationship. Further patterns that explore how to build trust between teams might enhance this pattern.

## Resulting Context

This particular pattern does not attempt to change the initial behavior of the contract development team (in terms of their potential lack of engagement with the InnerSource process). However, the end result is that the project does become part of the InnerSourced projects for the company after the fact.

## Known Instances

* **GitHub** has seen this approach work with their US government agency customers.

## Status

Initial

## Author(s)

> - Clare Dillon 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clare Dillon
```

All of the above can mean that even if an individual contract developer wants to engage in InnerSource, there are system-level constraints pushing them not to.

It should be noted that the above scenario is indirectly impacted by:

- The norms around defining Statements of Work for third party contractors
- Pressures to reduce contractor costs during procurement
- Ability to tie contributions to payment at a granular level.

It could also be noted that the contractor motivations in this instance is almost like a more extreme instance of the oft-reported organizational/budgetary constraints that might exist for some internal business units. (Not sure if this is relevant, but it does seem to be an extreme case of what is reported as common objections even in internal teams).

## Solutions

At the outset of the project, clearly define:

- That the code will be made visible by default.
- That the architecture of the code should be modular and ready for component reuse.

> - How the project will be transitioned to an InnerSource project. This could be similar to a transition of ownership plan for an open source project which should include: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How the project will be transitioned to an InnerSource project. This could be similar to a transition of ownership plan for an open source project which should include:
```

  - Identification of new a maintainer team
  - An announcement to stakeholders regarding the transition
  - Written documentation describing functionality, architecture, and common processes like releasing, patching, deploying, testing, etc.
  - A prescribed number of hours on the contract set aside for the contractor to meet with the identified long term maintainer (normally from the company who hired the contractor) for an overview of responsibilities and Q & A.
  - (untested) A 30 day warranty pattern could be applied and so the contractor would provide 30 days of direct transition support to the new maintainers

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
